Hey, there in this lesson, we're going to learn a little bit about bits and bytes and how data is
represented in the memory of a computer, so most people are aware that fundamentally computers store
information in numerical form and ultimately computers can really only understand at the lowest possible
level zeros and ones.
So all other data that isn't just a zero or a one has to be converted somehow down to zeros and ones.
Now, in the regular expression section, I discussed how letters of strings and text really have a
numerical value associated to each of them via various encoding schemes.
One of the earliest and most successful encoding schemes was ASCII.
And in the ASCII encoding scheme, the Capital Letter A is assigned the decimal numerical value of 65.
Now, the fact that Capital A equals 65 is really just an arbitrary assignment.
I'm a bunch of computer nerds got together and just decided one day that Capital A. is going to be 65,
essentially.
However, it's not enough just to decide that a capital A..
And all other characters, for that matter, are going to be represented by some number, like 65 or
whatever.
Even that number 65 still has to be translated a little bit more before it can fundamentally be stored
in the computer.
And the lowest level of things in the computer would be bits.
So let's look at what bits and bytes look like and how data is actually stored in the computer.
What I have here is a little spreadsheet where I've blown up the individual cells of the spreadsheet
big enough that we can talk about all of these different data types.
So you can imagine that each square in this spreadsheet represents one bit of data.
OK, so one square or one bit is capable of holding only one of two possible values.
It can hold a zero or it can hold a one.
And that's it.
Those are the only two things that you can put in a bit.
So if you need to represent something bigger, like the number 65, then you'll have to put a bunch
of bits together.
And the smallest number of bits that we can put together on modern computers typically is referred to
as a bite.
So a byte is eight bits put together.
OK.
And in fact, I'll even show you that that number 65 or capital a in ASCII encoding would be represented
like this one.
Zero zero zero zero zero and then another one, this is 65.
Now why is that 65?
How does this work?
First of all, what we're looking at here is what's called a binary encoding.
OK, so I just took the numbers 65 and translated it into binary.
And the way the binary works is that you have different places, just like in decimal.
If you when you were a little kid, you should have learned that the way that we count numbers, you
have the ones place, the tens, place, the hundreds, place thousands and so on and so forth, right?
That's how decimal numbers work.
When you've exhausted all of the numbers in the ones place, then you rotate to the next place, which
would be the tens place.
And now you can start filling in numbers there, while similarly in binary, you also have places.
But instead of having ones in tens and hundreds and thousands, you have one two, four, eight, 16,
32, 64 and so on and so forth.
OK.
These are the places, if you will, in binary.
And so if you want to have the numbers 65, then what you have to do is you have to put a one in the
64 place and a one in the ones place and add those together to equal 65.
And incidentally, each of the places in binary is a power of two.
OK.
So that's why these numbers go one two four eight, 16, 32, 64, 128 and so on and so forth.
They're just doubling themselves.
OK, so let's look at a few other numbers so that you can get the hang of this a little bit.
Not that you need to become an expert or anything, but.
So let's say we wanted to do the number nine, so we need to find the biggest numerical place that would
fit into the number nine from binary.
So we've got the ones twos, fours and eights and then 16.
So 16 would be too big four nine, eight fits into nine.
So we can put a one right there now nine minus eight equals one.
So that's what we have left over and we have to encode a one.
Well, we've got two ones placed right here so we can put the one right there and then these other two
places we didn't need, so we just put zero in there.
So one zero zero one is a nine.
OK.
And also eight plus one equals nine.
Let's do another one.
Let's do the number seven.
So what's the largest place that will fit into?
Seven.
So one would fit, two would fit, four would fit.
Eight does not fit because it's too big, so we have to back off.
So four fits right.
So we put a one here.
OK, so seven minus four leaves us with three.
So now we need to find the biggest place that would fit into three.
One fit to fit.
Four we've already used and it's too big, so we have to back off to two.
OK, so two fits.
So we put a one here.
So now we've got six, but we're trying to get to seven.
So seven minus six is one.
So now we need a one, which we have right here.
And so we put a one here.
Don't worry if you're not catching this well enough that you could do this on your own, you're not
likely to need to be able to do this.
Just sit back and relax and just watch the video if this seems a little too much or whatever.
But I would just want to convey how does binary work, you know?
All right, so let's do one or two more numbers.
Let's do.
I'm just going to pick something random.
13.
Let's do 13.
All right.
So same logic.
What's the biggest thing that we could fit into?
13.
First of all, while 16 is too big, so we need an eight.
OK, so we're going to put a one here and now 13 minus eight is five.
So what's the biggest number we could fit into a five?
That would be a four.
So we're going to put a one here.
And so now we've got eight plus four, which is 12, but 13 is the number we were going for.
So 13 minus 12 leaves one.
And so now we just need a one.
So we'll put a one here, and that means we didn't use the two the twos place, so we'll put a zero
here.
And so now that is 13 eight plus four is 12 plus one is 13.
Someone to clear out this first one here.
And I don't know, let's do one more.
Let's do thirty seven.
OK, so thirty seven, so we've got a thirty two here and a sixty four, obviously sixty four would
be too much.
So thirty two is where we're going to have to start.
So we've got a thirty two and we're trying to get to thirty seven.
So thirty seven minus thirty two is five.
So now we just need to fill up a five.
So four is the next biggest thing that we could fill in to five.
So we'll put a one there and that leaves us with just one more, which is a one.
And so we'll put that here.
OK.
And so now we've got thirty six, but we're trying to get to thirty seven.
And so thirty seven minus thirty six is one.
So we need a one.
We'll put that here and then the rest will be zeros.
And there is 37 in binary, so really it's just thirty two plus four plus one.
Okay.
That's how we get to 37.
All right.
So hopefully you can kind of see how binary works and how we can convert a decimal number into a binary
number.